Agile Software Development in Python: What to know in 2022
by Parth Barot February 7, 2022
AGILE DEVELOPMENT, PYTHON, TECHNOLOGY
Harvard Business Review states that 60% of companies that implement agile methodology experience revenue growth and profits. Agile principles provide a flexible approach to product development, which brings down costs and multiplies productivity. 

Python is a high-level, open-source programming language that enables developers and enterprises to build complex enterprise solutions with ease. Python development services are useful for web & mobile applications, GUI solutions, data science, embedded systems, game development, and much more. Therefore, it needs a project management approach that offers unmatched results. 

Agile Python development is a combination of technology and methodology. Python teams achieve faster results and much higher performance when utilizing agile. Agile methodology, in a nutshell, is not specific to Python – It is an approach to managing projects that leads to high-quality, rapid, and functional products. 

In agile, teams consider every sprint as a single project. Teams make iterations in the products with each sprint, improving upon its quality along the way. That way, they don’t have to wait until the project is complete to ensure all the necessary modifications are done. With more freedom and flexibility, agile and Python application development services are the perfect companion for today’s enterprises. 

Read more: Why Agile Management Mindset is Necessary for Modern Organizations

How Agile Benefits Python Development Teams
The agile methodology works on 12 principles of the agile manifesto. It is a big upgrade over waterfall methodology for software development that works in a linear sequence. Agile offers the ability to expand the project scope and redefine the solution at different stages.

Here’s how agile methodology in Python proves to be effective:

Adaptable Development Process
The biggest benefit for agile – changes take place without any rigid processes. The project is divided into sprints, and after the end of each sprint, the user provides feedback. Based on that, developers make product changes and modifications.
However, this doesn’t mean that changes can occur whenever the user wants. Product iterations happen only after the sprint is complete and on the basis of the feedback – they don’t arise during a sprint.
Continuous Product Improvements
Another advantage of agile in building Python web development solutions is that it enables continuous improvements. After each sprint, teams analyze how the product is progressing. Instead of waiting till the end of the development process, changes are made at the end of every sprint.
Therefore, it is easier to get product improvements early in the process. It offers better efficiency since there are rarely any errors once the final product is complete following the agile methodology.
Better Collaboration
Agile teams are cross-functional – they have analysts, project managers, designers, QA, and developers. They collaborate during brainstorming sessions to come up with ideas and better collaborate in every sprint.
On top of that, agile teams stay in constant connection with the stakeholders. It provides more transparency and offers a better understanding of what the client expects to see in the product. To achieve this outcome, teams collaborate to ensure that a 360-degree approach is followed.
Rapid Prototyping
Any Python development company in India will attest to agile’s faster prototyping capabilities. Many Python teams work with Django and follow the agile methodology to build rapid and dynamic products.
Since every sprint has a feedback loop, changes happen swiftly. The product is ready-to-test in no time. Agile teams seldom miss their deadlines – their priority is to launch the best possible version as early as possible.
 Higher Customer Involvement
No other methodology involves the client more than agile project management for Python open-source projects. After every sprint, the client provides valuable feedback on the product. They look at the features and provide suggestions on what changes to bring.
A higher level of customer involvement also leads to more satisfaction for them. It keeps the process transparent and the client in control of how the product should look like. It also improves the solution’s functionality and matches that of the client’s expectations.
Read more: How is Python Transforming Enterprise App Development in 2022?

Agile Software Development in Python: The Process Flow
The Agile process follows a sequence of steps for building high-quality software. Every Python development company may follow a modified version of the process, but it remains more or less the same.

Here’s a common process flow for agile software development in Python that most teams follow – 

Project Roadmap
The first step is to create a blueprint for the project. It outlines the objectives, process, and outcomes. The project plan showcases the entire navigation of the product.
Release Planning
Every project is then divided into different releases. Every release focuses on a specific feature of the product. All the milestones for the project are set in this step.
Sprint Planning
Team members are then assigned the tasks they will complete in a specific sprint. They will be given their deliverables and the time frames within which they have to deliver.
Regular Stand-ups
Daily Scrum meetings take place where the team discusses the progress of the previous day and decides what to do that day. They also identify and understand any bottlenecks that might have occurred in the process.
Feature Development
Once tasks are assigned, developers start working on the feature. The focus is to deliver the release during a particular timeframe assigned to them. Here, collaboration plays a key role.
Feedback & Review
After the sprint is over, the client provides valuable feedback on the release. Developers take over and enhance the feature or make modifications as per the client’s requirements.
Retrospective meeting
The final stage is to understand what went wrong during the previous sprint. After that, the product owner, scrum master, and the team plan the next sprint and decide what the deliverables will be.
Wrapping Up

The best Python application development process involves a high scope for flexibility and freedom to make changes as per the client’s need. Agile Python development is one of the biggest innovations in the programming world. It offers developers to build complete products with ease, ensuring that enterprises and startups get the best of product development. 

If you are looking for high-quality Python software development teams that utilize Python, BoTree Technologies is the right partner. Choose from our 80+ developers and get started with your project today.